k8s service endpoints check (#4412)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/agent/autodiscovery/endpointschecks.md

---
title: Running Endpoints Checks with Autodiscovery
kind: documentation
further_reading:
- link: "/agent/autodiscovery"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Main Autodiscovery documentation"
- link: "/agent/autodiscovery/clusterchecks/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Cluster Checks documentation"
- link: "/agent/kubernetes/cluster/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Cluster Agent documentation"
---

## How it Works

The [Cluster Checks][1] feature offers the possibility to auto-discover and perform Checks on load-balanced cluster services (eg. Kubernetes services). The Endpoints Checks feature extends this mechanism to monitor Endpoints behind cluster services.

The [Cluster Agent][2] holds the configurations and exposes them to node-based Agents so they can consume and convert them into Endpoints Checks.

Endpoints Checks are consumed and scheduled by Agents based on same nodes with worker pods of the service.

> The Agents connect to the Cluster Agent every 10 seconds and retrieve the configurations to run, the Endpoints Checks collected will be submitted with service, pod and hostname tags.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Agents connect to the Cluster Agent every 10 seconds and retrieve the check configurations to run. Metrics coming from Endpoints Checks will be submitted with service, pod and host tags.
```

This feature is currently supported on Kubernetes for versions 6.9.0+ of the Agent, and versions 1.3.0+ of the Cluster Agent.

## How to set it up

### Cluster Agent setup

This feature requires a running [Cluster Agent with the Cluster Checks feature enabled][3].

### Agent setup

> Enable the `clusterchecks` and `endpointschecks` configuration providers on the Datadog **Host** Agent. This can be done in two ways:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enable the `clusterchecks` and `endpointschecks` configuration providers on the Datadog **Node** Agent. This can be done in two ways:
```

- By setting the `DD_EXTRA_CONFIG_PROVIDERS` environment variable:

```

> DD_EXTRA_CONFIG_PROVIDERS="clusterchecks endpointschecks"

Reviewer: Can we enable endpointschecks only, or is `clusterchecks` mandatory on the node agent? That's an issue if customers want to use a dedicated deployment for cluster checks.

Author: Yes we can enable `endpointschecks` only,  I will add this option in the doc 👍

```

- Or adding it to the `datadog.yaml` configuration file:

```yaml
config_providers:
  - name: clusterchecks
    polling: true
  - name: endpointschecks
    polling: true
```

[Restart the Agent][4] to apply the configuration change.

## Setting up Check Configurations via Kubernetes Service Annotations

Similar to [annotating Kubernetes Pods][5], Services can be annotated with the following syntax:

```yaml
  ad.datadoghq.com/service.check_names: '[<CHECK_NAME>]'
  ad.datadoghq.com/service.init_configs: '[<INIT_CONFIG>]'
  ad.datadoghq.com/service.instances: '[<INSTANCE_CONFIG>]'
  ad.datadoghq.com/endpoints.check_names: '[<CHECK_NAME>]'
  ad.datadoghq.com/endpoints.init_configs: '[<INIT_CONFIG>]'
  ad.datadoghq.com/endpoints.instances: '[<INSTANCE_CONFIG>]'
```

The `%%host%%` [template variable][6] is supported and is replaced by the service's and endpoints' IPs. The `kube_namespace` and `kube_service` tags are automatically added to the instances.

> **Note**: It is required to set both `ad.datadoghq.com/service.*` and `ad.datadoghq.com/endpoints.*` annotations to enable the Endpoints Checks on the service's endpoints.

Reviewer: can we say "For now", or say that we plan to change that?

The following Service definition exposes the Pods from the `my-nginx` deployment and runs an [HTTP check][7] to measure the latency of the load-balanced service:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: my-nginx
  labels:
    run: my-nginx
  annotations:
    ad.datadoghq.com/service.check_names: '["http_check"]'
    ad.datadoghq.com/service.init_configs: '[{}]'
    ad.datadoghq.com/service.instances: |
      [
        {
          "name": "My Nginx Service",
          "url": "http://%%host%%",
          "timeout": 1
        }
      ]
    ad.datadoghq.com/endpoints.check_names: '["nginx"]'
    ad.datadoghq.com/endpoints.init_configs: '[{}]'
    ad.datadoghq.com/endpoints.instances: |
      [
        {
          "name": "My Nginx Service Endpoints",
          "nginx_status_url": "http://%%host%%/nginx_status/"
        }
      ]
spec:
  ports:
  - port: 80
    protocol: TCP
  selector:
    run: my-nginx
```

## Troubleshooting

Troubleshooting Endpoints Checks is similar to [troubleshooting Cluster Checks][8], the only difference is on the node-based Agents where scheduled Endpoints Checks appear along side the Cluster Check.

> **Note**: Endpoints Checks are only scheduled by Agents that share the same nodes with the current service's worker pods.

Reviewer: Could we reword this one similarly to what i mentioned above 🙏 ?

This feature is currently supported on Kubernetes for versions 6.12.0+ of the Agent, and versions 1.3.0+ of the Cluster Agent.

#### Example: Three NGINX pods exposed by `nginx` Service
```
# kubectl get svc nginx -o wide
NAME    TYPE        CLUSTER-IP     EXTERNAL-IP   PORT(S)   AGE   SELECTOR
nginx   ClusterIP   10.3.253.165   <none>        80/TCP    1h    app=nginx
```
```
# kubectl get pods --selector app=nginx
NAME                     READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
nginx-758655469f-59q9z   1/1     Running   0          20h
nginx-758655469f-k8zrc   1/1     Running   0          20h
nginx-758655469f-lk9p6   1/1     Running   0          20h
```
```
# kubectl get ep nginx -o yaml
...
- addresses:
  - ip: 10.0.0.117
    nodeName: gke-cluster-default-pool-4658d5d4-k2sn
    targetRef:
      kind: Pod
      name: nginx-758655469f-lk9p6
      ...
  - ip: 10.0.1.209
    nodeName: gke-cluster-default-pool-4658d5d4-p39c
    targetRef:
      kind: Pod
      name: nginx-758655469f-59q9z
      ...
  - ip: 10.0.1.210
    nodeName: gke-cluster-default-pool-4658d5d4-p39c
    targetRef:
      kind: Pod
      name: nginx-758655469f-k8zrc
      ...
```

> By design, Endpoints Checks are scheduled by Agents that run on the same node as the pods that back the endpoints of `nginx` service, so only Agents running on the nodes `gke-cluster-default-pool-4658d5d4-k2sn` and `gke-cluster-default-pool-4658d5d4-p39c` will schedule the Checks on the `nginx` pods.

Author: done :)

---
title: Running Endpoints Checks with Autodiscovery
kind: documentation
further_reading:
- link: "/agent/autodiscovery"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Main Autodiscovery documentation"
- link: "/agent/autodiscovery/clusterchecks/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Cluster Checks documentation"
- link: "/agent/kubernetes/cluster/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Cluster Agent documentation"
---

## How it Works

> The [Cluster Checks][1] feature offers the possibility to autodiscover and perform checks on load-balanced cluster services (eg. Kubernetes services). The Endpoints Checks feature extends this mechanism to monitor every endpoint behind cluster services.

Reviewer 2: Is Cluster Checks intentionally plural here?

The [Cluster Agent][2] holds the configurations and exposes them to node-based Agents so they can consume and convert them into Endpoints Checks.

> Endpoints Checks are scheduled by Agents that run on the same node as the pod(s) that backs the endpoint(s) of the service.

Reviewer 2: s/backs/back/

"the service" -> "the monitored service"
